gRPC ebook Chapter 7 (#14438)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/grpc-for-wcf-developers/apm.md

## Logging vs Metrics

Before looking at the implementation details, it is necessary to understand the difference between logging and metrics.

Logging is concerned with text messages that record detailed information about things that have happened in the system. Log messages may include exception data like stack traces, or structured data that provides context about the message. Logging output is commonly written to a searchable text store.

Metrics refers to numeric data that is designed to be aggregated and presented using charts and graphs in a dashboard that provides a view of the overall health and performance of an application. Metrics data can also be used to trigger automated alerts when a threshold is exceeded. Examples of metrics data include the time taken to process requests, the number of requests per second being handled by an instance of a service, or the number of failed requests on an instance.

## Logging in ASP.NET Core gRPC

> ASP.NET Core provides support for logging out-of-the-box, in the form of the [Microsoft.Extensions.Logging package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.Logging). This is included with the Web SDK so there is no need to install it manually. The gRPC framework writes its internal diagnostic logging messages to ASP.NET Core logging so they can be processed/stored along with the application's own messages.

Reviewer: > This is included with the Web SDK so there is no need to install it manually

I really don't like the phrasing here. grpc-dotnet, by virtue of using the ASP.NET Core App Model uses the same logging abstractions that ASP.NET Core does. You still will configure need to configure a production logging sink that use these abstractions.

Reviewer: I think the things worth mentioning are
- grpc uses Microsoft.Extensions.Logging abstraction
- grpc writes framework logs to the configured logger
- You can bring in additional logging sinks
- How to use the log in user code (which you've covered well in the next section)

### Producing log messages

The Logging extension is automatically registered with ASP.NET Core's dependency injection system, so loggers can be specified as a constructor parameter on gRPC service types.

```csharp
public class StockData : Stocks.StocksBase
{
    private readonly ILogger<StockData> _logger;

    public StockData(ILogger<StockData> logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }
}
```

A lot of log messages around requests, exceptions, etc. are provided by the ASP.NET Core and gRPC framework components. You should add your own log messages to provide detail and context about application logic rather than lower level concerns.

For more information please refer to the [ASP.NET Core Logging documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/logging/?view=aspnetcore-3.0).

## Metrics in ASP.NET Core gRPC

> The .NET Core framework provides a set of components for measuring performance in the [System.Diagnostics.Tracing](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Diagnostics.Tracing/) package. This includes the `EventSource` and `EventCounter` types, which can be used to emit basic numeric data that can be consumed by external processes like the [dotnet-counters global tool](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/dotnet-counters-instructions.md), or Event Tracing for Windows. To learn more about using `EventCounter` in your own code refer to the [EventCounter Introduction Tutorial](https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/blob/master/src/System.Diagnostics.Tracing/documentation/EventCounterTutorial.md).

Reviewer: The types are available as part of the BCL. I'd omit mentioning the package altogether
```suggestion
The .NET Core runtime provides a set of components for emitting and observing metrics. This includes the `EventSource` and `EventCounter` types, which can be used to emit basic numeric data that can be consumed by external processes like the [dotnet-counters global tool](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/dotnet-counters-instructions.md), or Event Tracing for Windows. To learn more about using `EventCounter` in your own code refer to the [EventCounter Introduction Tutorial](https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/blob/master/src/System.Diagnostics.Tracing/documentation/EventCounterTutorial.md).
```

For more advanced metrics, and for writing metric data to a wider range of data stores, there is an excellent open source project called [App Metrics](https://www.app-metrics.io). This suite of libraries provides an extensive set of types to instrument your code, and offers packages to write metrics to a variety of targets including time-series databases (e.g. Prometheus and InfluxDB), [Azure AppInsights](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/app/app-insights-overview) and more. The [App.Metrics.AspNetCore.Mvc](https://www.nuget.org/packages/App.Metrics.AspNetCore.Mvc/) package even adds a comprehensive set of basic metrics automatically generated via integration with the ASP.NET Core framework, and the web site provides templates for displaying those the [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) visualization platform.

> More information and full documentation on AppMetrics is available through their web site at [app-metrics.io](https://app-metrics.io).

Reviewer: Is there a particular reason you've chosen AppMetrics? I'm not against it, I'm just curious.

As far as I'm aware Application Insights is the only product to offer an SDK (in beta today, will ship with 3.0) that allows you to consume metrics. Unfortunately, the docs haven't yet been updated to reflect that so I don't have something for you to cross-link to.

Reviewer 2: In my experience AppMetrics is the most complete .NET library for doing the full range of metrics and it's back-end agnostic, including supporting AppInsights.

Because DiagnosticSource is a part of the core framework, it is supported by several core components, including `HttpClient`, Entity Framework Core and ASP.NET Core, including explicit support in the gRPC framework. When ASP.NET Core receives a request, it will check for a pair of HTTP headers matching the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context) standard. If the headers are found, an Activity is started using the identity values and context from the headers. If no headers are found, an Activity is started with generated identity values that match the standard format. Any diagnostics generated by the framework or by application code during the lifetime of this Activity can be tagged with the trace and span identifiers. The `HttpClient` support extends this further by checking for a current Activity on every request and automatically adding the trace headers to the outgoing request.

> The gRPC client and server libraries include explicit support for DiagnosticSource and Activity, and will create activities and apply and use header information automatically.

Reviewer: Maybe worth clarifying that you're talking about grpc-dotnet here. Not all gRPC implementation do this out of the box.

> [!NOTE]
> All of this only happens if a *listener* is consuming the diagnostic information. If there is no listener, no diagnostics are written and no activities are created.

### Implementing your own DiagnosticSource

> Although a good quantity of data is automatically generated by ASP.NET Core, including gRPC, as well as Entity Framework Core and `HttpClient`, you may wish to add your own diagnostics or create explicit spans within your application code. You can create a named `DiagnosticSource` and write event data to it, or create an `Activity` to record a specific operation. `DiagnosticSource` is an abstract class; `DiagnosticListener` inherits from it and can be used to create an instance. The class is intended to be used as a singleton; it is common to create it as a static field in an internal class.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the Activity guide in CoreFx? https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/blob/master/src/System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource/src/ActivityUserGuide.md#activity-user-guide

## Logging vs Metrics

Before looking at the implementation details, it is necessary to understand the difference between logging and metrics.

Logging is concerned with text messages that record detailed information about things that have happened in the system. Log messages may include exception data like stack traces, or structured data that provides context about the message. Logging output is commonly written to a searchable text store.

Metrics refers to numeric data that is designed to be aggregated and presented using charts and graphs in a dashboard that provides a view of the overall health and performance of an application. Metrics data can also be used to trigger automated alerts when a threshold is exceeded. Examples of metrics data include the time taken to process requests, the number of requests per second being handled by an instance of a service, or the number of failed requests on an instance.

## Logging in ASP.NET Core gRPC

> ASP.NET Core provides support for logging out-of-the-box, in the form of the [Microsoft.Extensions.Logging package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.Logging). The core parts of this library are included with the Web SDK so there is no need to install it manually. By default, log messages are written to standard output (the "console") and to any attached debugger. To write logs to persistent external data stores you may need to import [optional logging sink packages](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/logging/?view=aspnetcore-3.0#third-party-logging-providers).

Reviewer 2: Changed to `built-in`.

    {
        _logger = logger;
    }
}
```

A lot of log messages around requests, exceptions, etc. are provided by the ASP.NET Core and gRPC framework components. You should add your own log messages to provide detail and context about application logic rather than lower level concerns.

For more information, including advice on writing log messages, and available logging sinks and targets, please refer to the [ASP.NET Core Logging documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/logging/?view=aspnetcore-3.0).

## Metrics in ASP.NET Core gRPC

The .NET Core runtime provides a set of components for emitting and observing metrics. This includes the `EventSource` and `EventCounter` types, which can be used to emit basic numeric data that can be consumed by external processes like the [dotnet-counters global tool](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/dotnet-counters-instructions.md), or Event Tracing for Windows. To learn more about using `EventCounter` in your own code refer to the [EventCounter Introduction Tutorial](https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/blob/master/src/System.Diagnostics.Tracing/documentation/EventCounterTutorial.md).

> For more advanced metrics, and for writing metric data to a wider range of data stores, there is an excellent open source project called [App Metrics](https://www.app-metrics.io). This suite of libraries provides an extensive set of types to instrument your code, and offers packages to write metrics to a variety of targets including time-series databases (e.g. Prometheus and InfluxDB), [Azure AppInsights](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/app/app-insights-overview) and more. The [App.Metrics.AspNetCore.Mvc](https://www.nuget.org/packages/App.Metrics.AspNetCore.Mvc/) package even adds a comprehensive set of basic metrics automatically generated via integration with the ASP.NET Core framework, and the web site provides templates for displaying those the [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) visualization platform.

Reviewer 2: Fixed.

## Logging in ASP.NET Core gRPC

ASP.NET Core provides support for logging out-of-the-box, in the form of the [Microsoft.Extensions.Logging package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.Logging). This is included with the Web SDK so there is no need to install it manually.

### Producing log messages

The Logging extension is automatically registered with ASP.NET Core's dependency injection system, so loggers can be specified as a constructor parameter on gRPC service types.

```csharp
public class StockData : Stocks.StocksBase
{
    private readonly ILogger<StockData> _logger;

    public StockData(ILogger<StockData> logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }
}
```

The `ILogger<T>` interface is generic so that it can use the fully-qualified name of the class that generated the message as the *Log Category*. There is a non-generic `ILogger` interface that can be created with a custom *Log Category* string, but using the generic version means that categories are consistently applied throughout an application.

> Log messages are assigned *levels* indicating their importance, which allows the components writing the log output to various destinations whether to include messages or not. These levels allow developers to generate more log messages while debugging or testing code, and fewer messages in production systems to avoid overwhelming the storage providers.

Reviewer 3: IMO this section on log levels could be shortened and replaced with links to existing logging documentation.

| Debug | 1 | Messages that are useful for debugging but do not include sensitive data. |
| Information | 2 | Messages about the general operation of the application. |
| Warning | 3 | Messages indicating abnormal or unexpected events that do not cause errors but may require investigation. |
| Error | 4 | Messages about errors that cause an operation to fail. Usually include `Exception` data. |
| Critical | 5 | Messages indicating problems that require immediate attention, such as loss of database connectivity. |

The level can be specified using the `LogLevel` enum with the `ILogger<T>.Log` method.

```csharp
_logger.Log(LogLevel.Information, "GetStock request received.");
```

There are also extension methods for each of the log levels.

```csharp
_logger.LogTrace("Getting user information for ID '{userId}'", id);
_logger.LogDebug("Connecting to database");
_logger.LogInformation("Running query");
_logger.LogWarning("No records found");
_logger.LogError(exception, "Error reading data");
_logger.LogCritical(exception, "Database not available");
```

### Structured logging

> Log files have traditionally been stored as unstructured text data, making them difficult to search in a consistent fashion. *Structured logging* aims to solve this problem by attaching key/value pairs to log entries that can be searched more precisely. ASP.NET Core logging supports structured logging by default; to take advantage of it, you simply need to use a convention when writing log messages.

Reviewer 3: > IMO this section on log levels could be shortened and replaced with links to existing logging documentation.

Here to. This info is probably covered in existing logging documentation.

| Provider | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| Console  | Writes simple messages to standard output |
| Debug    | Writes simple messages to a debugger (e.g. Visual Studio) if any is attached |
| TraceSource | Makes messages available to .NET TraceListener |
| EventSource | Makes messages available to .NET EventListener |
| EventLog | Writes messages to the Windows Event Log |
| AzureAppServices | Writes messages and structured data to Azure "Diagnostic logs" and "Log stream" features |

Writing to other storage systems, like SQL databases, text files, or specialized databases like [Elasticsearch](https://elastic.co), is not natively supported by the core libraries. Support for other platforms can be added using one of the various open source logging libraries available for .NET Core, such as Serilog, NLog or log4net, which have extensions supporting a wide range of logging targets. Refer to the documentation for your preferred library for information on how to configure it to work with ASP.NET Core logging.

## Metrics in ASP.NET Core gRPC

> Unlike logging, there is no in-the-box support for producing metrics data in ASP.NET Core. There is an excellent open source library called [App Metrics](https://www.app-metrics.io), which provides an extensive set of types to instrument your code, and additional packages to write metrics to a variety of targets including time-series databases (e.g. Prometheus and InfluxDB), [Azure AppInsights](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/app/app-insights-overview) and more. The [App.Metrics.AspNetCore.Mvc](https://www.nuget.org/packages/App.Metrics.AspNetCore.Mvc/) package even adds a comprehensive set of basic metrics automatically generated via integration with the ASP.NET Core framework, and the web site provides templates for displaying those the [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) visualization platform.

Reviewer 3: Is this still true? See https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/introducing-diagnostics-improvements-in-net-core-3-0/

gRPC uses the new counters to captures metrics on the [server](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet/blob/aad959b7292b0b98e99996bb056ffe73e494e635/src/Grpc.AspNetCore.Server/Internal/GrpcEventSource.cs) and [client](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet/blob/aad959b7292b0b98e99996bb056ffe73e494e635/src/Grpc.Net.Client/Internal/GrpcEventSource.cs).

It would still be useful to document how to listen to those counters and export them to a third-party.

// @shirhatti

Reviewer 2: Added a note on EventSource/EventCounters.

The current go-to solution for visualizing metrics data is [Grafana](https://grafana.com), which works with a wide range of storage providers including Azure Monitor, InfluxDB and Prometheus. Here is an example Grafana dashboard showing metrics from the Linkerd service mesh running the StockData sample.

![Grafana dashboard](images/grafana-screenshot.png)

### Metrics-based alerting

The numerical nature of metrics data means that it is ideally suited to drive alerting systems, notifying developers or support engineers when a value falls outside of some defined tolerance. The platforms already mentioned all provide support for alerting via a range of options, including emails, text messages or in-dashboard visualizations.

## Distributed tracing

*Distributed tracing* is a relatively recent development in monitoring, which has arisen from the increasing use of microservices and distributed architectures. A single request from a client browser, application or device may be broken down into many steps and sub-requests and involve the use of many services across a network. This makes it difficult to correlate log messages and metrics with the specific request that triggered them.

> Although it is still a nascent technology area, distributed tracing has grown quickly in popularity and is now supported by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation, with [the Open Tracing standard](https://opentracing.io) effort attempting to provide vendor-neutral libraries for working with backends like [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) and [Elastic APM](https://www.elastic.co/products/apm).

Reviewer 3: OpenTracing is old and busted. OpenTelemetry is the new hotness

https://thenewstack.io/opentracing-opencensus-merge-into-a-single-new-project-opentelemetry/

Reviewer 2: I hate computers.

Reviewer 2: Added https://github.com/dotnet/docs/pull/14438/files#diff-02130034a4b7526dbd006328cb690893R109

```csharp
public class StockDataService
{
    public override async Task<GetResponse> Get(GetRequest request, ServerCallContext context)
    {
        Activity activity = null;
        if (StockDataDiagnostics.Listener.IsEnabled("StockDataService.Get"))
        {
            activity = new Activity("StockDataService.Get");
            StockDataDiagnostics.Listener.StartActivity(activity, request);
        }
        try
        {
            // Handle request
        }
        finally
        {
            if (activity != null)
            {
                StockDataDiagnostics.Listener.StopActivity(activity, request);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The `Activity` class supports the tracing span concept of *baggage*: there is an `AddBaggage` method that takes a `string` key and a `string` value, and these values will be propagated by `HttpClient` and the gRPC client.

```csharp
var activity = new Activity("StockDataService.Get");
activity.AddBaggage("InstanceId", _myInstanceId);
```

### Writing distributed trace data

> There is [an OpenTracing NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTracing/) which supports all OpenTracing-compliant back-ends. This package can be used independently of `DiagnosticSource`. But there is an additional package from the OpenTracing API Contributions project, [OpenTracing.Contrib.NetCore](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTracing.Contrib.NetCore/), which adds a `DiagnosticSource` listener and writes events and activities to a back-end automatically. Enabling this package is as simple as installing it from NuGet and adding it as a service in your `Startup` class.

Reviewer 3: New hotness: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet

Should use this rather than open tracing. Note: it's pretty new and rough

Reviewer 2: It's incredibly new and rough. I'd prefer to leave the (slightly) more stable OpenTracing stuff in there for now and add a note that OpenTelemetry will be the preferred option in the future, maybe come back and update the book when it's stabilised.

Reviewer 2: Added a note about OpenTelemetry .NET SDK but kept OpenTracing text with a caveat. https://github.com/dotnet/docs/pull/14438/files#diff-02130034a4b7526dbd006328cb690893R191

Reviewer 2: I actually demo'd the OpenTelemetry stuff with Jaeger at a user group last night, and the alpha5 they've currently got on Nuget is completely busted. I had to use their Myget to get alpha26 which worked OK, but yeah: it's rough.
